the middle of my PhD I was hopelessly
stuck every research direction that I
tried led to a dead end it seemed like
my basic assumptions just stopped
working I felt like a pilot flying
through the mist and I lost all sense of
direction I stopped shaving I couldn't
get out of bed in the morning I felt
unworthy of stepping across the gates of
the University because I wasn't like
Einstein or Newton or any other
scientist whose results I had learned
about because in science we just learned
about the results not the process and so
obviously I couldn't be a scientist but
I had enough support and I made it
through and discovered something new
about nature this is an amazing feeling
of calmness being the only person in the
world who knows a new law of nature and
I started the second project in my PhD
and it happened again
I got stuck and I made it through and I
started thinking maybe there's a pattern
here I asked the other graduate students
and they said yeah that's exactly what
happened to us except nobody told us
about it we'd all studied science as if
it's a series of logical steps between
question and answer but during research
is nothing like that at the same time I
was also studying to be an improvisation
theater actor so physics by day and by
night laughing jumping singing playing
my guitar improvisation theater just
like science goes into the unknown
because you have to make a scene on
stage without a director without a
script without having any idea what your
portray or the other characters will do
but unlike science in improvisation
theater they tell you from day one
what's gonna happen to you when you get
on stage you're gonna fail miserably
you're gonna get stuck and we would
practice staying creative inside that
stuck place for example we had an
exercise where we all stood in a circle
and each person had to do the world's
worst tap dance and everybody else
applauded and cheered you on supporting
you on stage when I became a professor
and had to guide my own students through
their research project
I realized again I don't know what to do
I studied thousands of hours of physics
biology chemistry but not one hour not
one concept and how do mentor how to
guide someone to go together into the
unknown about motivation so I turned to
improvisation theater and I told my
students from day one what's going to
happen when you start research and this
has to do with our mental schema of what
research will be like because you see
whenever people do anything for example
if I want to touch this blackboard my
brain first builds up a schema
prediction of exactly what my muscles
will do before I even start moving my
hand and if I get blocked if my schema
doesn't match reality that causes extra
stress called cognitive dissonance
that's why your schemas a better match
reality but if you believe the way
science is taught and if you believe
textbooks you're liable to have the
following schema of research if a is the
question and B is the answer then
research is a direct path the problem is
that if an experiment doesn't work or a
student gets depressed it's perceived as
something utterly wrong and causes
tremendous stress and that's why I teach
my students a more realistic schema here
is an example where things don't match
your schema
[Applause]
you know so I teach my students a
different schema if a is the question B
is the answer
stay creative in the cloud and you start
going and experiments don't work
experiments don't work experiments don't
work experiments don't work until you
reach a place linked with negative
emotions where it seems like your basic
assumptions of stopped making sense like
somebody yanked the carpet beneath your
feet
and I call this place the cloud
now you can be lost in the cloud for a
day a week a month a year a whole career
but sometimes if you're lucky enough and
you have enough support you can see in
the materials at hand or perhaps
meditating on the shape of the cloud a
new answer see and you decide to go for
it
experiments don't work experiments don't
work but you get there and then you tell
everyone about it by publishing a paper
that reads a aro C which is a great way
to communicate but as long as you don't
forget the path that brought you there
now this cloud is an inherent part of
research inherent part of our craft
because the cloud stands guard at the
boundary it stands guard at the boundary
between the known and the unknown
because in order to discover something
truly new at least one of your basic
assumptions has to change and that means
that in science we do something quite
heroic every day we try to bring
ourselves to the boundary between the
known and the unknown and face the cloud
now notice that they put be in the land
of the known because we knew about it at
the beginning but see is always more
interesting and more important than B so
B is essential in order to get going but
C is much more profound and that's the
amazing thing about research now just
knowing that word the cloud has been
transformational in my research group
because students come to me and say ory
I'm in the cloud and I say great you
must be feeling miserable but I'm kind
of happy because we might be close to
the boundary between the known and the
unknown and we stand a chance of
discovering something truly new since
the way our mind works is just knowing
that the cloud you know is normal it's
essential and in fact beautiful we can
join the cloud Appreciation Society
yeah detoxify is the feeling that
something is deeply wrong with me and as
a mentor I know what to do which is to
step up my support for the students
because research in psychology shows
that if you're feeling fear and despair
your mind narrows down to very safe and
conservative as ways of thinking if
you'd like to explore the risky paths
need to get out of the cloud you need
other emotions solidarity support hope
that come with your connection from
somebody else so like an improvisation
theater and science it's best to walk
into the unknown together so knowing
about the cloud you also learn from
improvisation theater a very effective
way to have conversations inside the
cloud it's based on the central
principle of improvisation theater
so here improvisation theater came to my
help again it's called saying yes and to
the offers made by other actors
that means accepting the offers and
building on them saying yes and for
example if one actress says here's a
pool of water and the others actor says
no that's just a stage the improvisation
is over it's dead and everybody feels
frustrated saying you know that's called
blocking if you're not mindful of
communications scientific conversations
can have a lot of blocking saying yes
and sounds like this here is a pool of
water yeah let's jump in
look there's a whale let's grab it by
its tail it's pulling us to the moon so
he's saying yes and bypasses our inner
critic we all have an inner critic that
kind of guards what we say so people
don't think that we're obscene or crazy
or unoriginal and science is full of
fear of appearing on unoriginal saying
yes and bypasses the critic and unlocks
hitted voices of creativity you didn't
even know that you had and they often
carry the answer about the cloud oh you
see knowing about the cloud and about
saying yes and made my lab very creative
students started playing off of each
other's ideas and we made surprising
discoveries in the interface between
physics and biology for example we were
stuck for a year trying to understand
the intricate biochemical networks
inside ourselves and we said we are
deeply in the cloud and we had a playful
conversation where my students - all
said let's just draw this on a piece of
paper this network I mean instead of
saying but we've done that so many times
and it doesn't work I said yes and let's
use a very big piece of paper and then
Ron Mello said let's use a gigantic
artists an architect's blueprint kind of
paper and I know where to print it and
we printed out the network and looked at
it and that's where we made our most
important discovery that this
complicated network is just made of a
handful of simple repeating interaction
patterns like motifs in a stained glass
window then we call them Network motifs
and they're the elementary circuits that
help us understand the logic of the way
cells make decisions in all organisms
including our body soon enough after
this I started being invited to give
talks to thousands of
scientists across the world but the
knowledge about the cloud and saying yes
and she stayed within my own lab because
he's in science we don't talk about the
process anything subjective room or
emotional we talk about the results so
there's no way to talk about it in
conferences that was unthinkable and I
saw scientists and other groups get
stuck without even having a word to
describe what they're seeing and their
ways of thinking narrowed down to very
safe paths your science didn't reach its
full potential and they were miserable I
thought that's the way it is I try to
make my lab as creative as possible and
if everybody else does the same science
will eventually become more and more
better and better that way of thinking
got turned on its head when by chance I
went to hear Evelyn Fox Keller give a
talk about her experiences as a woman in
science and she asked why is it that we
don't talk about the subjective and
emotional aspects of doing science it's
not by chance it's a matter of values
you see science seeks knowledge that's
objective and rational that's the
beautiful thing about science but we
also have a cultural myth that the doing
of science what we do every day to get
that knowledge is also only objective
and rational as like mr. Spock when you
label something is objective and
rational automatically the other side
the subjective and emotional become
labeled as non science or anti science
or threatening to science if we should
still talk about it and when I heard
that that science has a culture
everything clicked into place for me
because if science has a culture culture
can be changed and that can be a change
agent working to change the culture of
science wherever I could and so the very
next lecture I gave in a conference I
talked about by science and then I
talked about the importance of the
subjective and emotional aspects of
doing science and how we should talk
about him and I looked at the audience
and they were cold they couldn't hear
what I was what I was saying in the
context of a tent back to back
PowerPoint presentation conference and
they tried again and again conference
after conference but I wasn't getting
through I was in the cloud
and eventually I managed to get out of
the cloud using improvisation in music
actually I since then every let a
conference I go to a give a science talk
in a second special talk called love and
fear in the lab and I started off by
doing a song about scientists greatest
fear which is that we work hard we
discover we discover something new and
somebody else publishes it before we did
yeah it's what we call it being scooped
and being scooped feels horrible
it makes us afraid to talk to each other
which is no fun because we came to
science to share our ideas and to learn
from each other and so I do a blues song
which called scooped again and I asked
the audience to be my backup singers and
I tell them you're your Texas scoop
scoop sounds like this scoop scoop
fellas I have been scooped again scoop
scoop and then we go for it I have been
scooped again scoop scoop I've been
scooped again I've been scooped again
I've been scooped again
oh mama can't you feel my pain heavens
help me I've scooped her again
[Applause]
thank you thank you for your backup
singing so everybody starts laughing
starts breathing notices that there's
other scientists around the most shared
issues and we start talking about the
emotional and subjective things that go
on in research it feels like a huge
taboo has been lifted finally we can
talk about this in a scientific
conference scientists have gone on to
form peer groups where they meet
regularly and create a space to talk
about the emotional and subjected to
things that happen as they're mentoring
as they're going into the unknown and
even started courses about the process
of doing science about going into the
unknown together and many other things
so my vision is that just like every
scientist knows the word atom that
matter is made out of atoms every
scientist would know the words like the
cloud saying yes and and science will
become much more creative make many many
more unexpected discoveries for the
benefit of us all and we'll also be much
more playful and what I might ask you to
remember from this talk is that next
time you face a problem you can't solve
and work or in life there's a word for
what you're going to see the cloud and
you can go through the cloud not alone
but together with someone who's your
source of support to say yes and to your
ideas 12 you say yes and to your own
ideas to increase the chance look
through the wisps of the cloud you'll
find that moment of calmness where you
get your first glimpse of your
unexpected discovery you're see thank
you
[Applause]